---
layout: post
title: "First Post"
date: 2013-02-08 23:16
comments: true
categories: [personaldev]
---

My name is David Knight, and I'm a software engineer at the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory in Pasadena, California.

This blog is a place for me to write down my thoughts on programming and
technology in addition to writing about some more general interests like food,
space exploration, environmentalism, philosophy, college football, etc. Even
without a wide audience, I'm hoping that starting a blog will help me make
headway on a few personal goals that have been simmering on the back burner of
my mind for a little while now.

My primary motivation for creating this site is that I have witnessed the extent
to which my writing skills have atrophied post-college. The act of putting words
down on paper feels like a haphazard activity where I lack a firm command over
the thoughts that are constructed on the page. Perhaps I'm viewing the past
through rose-colored glasses, but even writing simple pieces seems to now take
longer and require significantly more mental effort. I assume that this
regression of ability is simply a case of "use it or lose it", so the logical
course of action is to write more often.

In addition to keeping skills sharp, I've also been wanting to adopt a new
creative hobby. Of course coming from an engineer, it's common knowledge that
the phrase "creative hobby" is code for "whatever is the opposite of what I do
at work", and writing about programming alone doesn't really escape the sphere
of work-related activities. For this reason I'd like this blog to house a fairly
broad collection of subjects.

Finally, one of my more outlandish goals for writing content here is to try and
improve my habits and mindset. I always performed fairly well in school, but I
also procrastinated frequently (who doesn't, right?). Typically I'd finish
assignments the night before a deadline, which over the years built a dependence
on external and negative motivation. School deadlines are external motivators
because they are imposed by other people, and they are negative motivators
because they are enforced through penalties. It's taken a while to properly
articulate this phenomenon as it relates to myself, but thanks to a proper
vocabulary it is now obvious that I should invest in becoming more positively
and internally motivated. Hopefully I'll progress towards this goal through many
methods, one of which can be maintaining this blog as its development is solely
a product of the time and effort that I put into it.
